
PARTl 
Creating a Character for Dungeons and Dragons
~ml~IIIF--­
P\ 


~ 
Record your level on your character sheet. Ifyou're starting at a higher level, record the additional elements your class gives you for your levels past 1st. Also record your experience points. A I st-level character has 0 XP. A higher-level character typically begins with the minimum amount ofXP required to reach that level (see "Beyond lst Level" later in this chapter). 
HIT POINTS AND HIT DICE 
Your character's hit points define how tough your character is in combat and other dangerous situations. Your hit points are determined by your Hit Dice (short for Hit Point Dice). 
ABILITY SCORE SUMMARY Strength 
Measures: Natural athleticism, bodily power Important for: Barbarian, fighter, paladin Racial Increases: 
Mountain dwarf (+2) Half-ore (+2) Dragonborn (+2) Human (+l) 

Dexterity 


Measures: Physical agility, reflexes, balance, poise Important for: Monk, ranger, rogue Racial Increases: 
Elf (+2) Forest gnome (+1) HalAing (+2) Human (+1) 

Constitution 
Measures: Health, stamina, vital force Important for: Everyone Racial Increases: 
Dwarf(+2) Half-ore (+1) Stout halAing (+ 1) Human (+1) Rock gnome (+1) 

Intelligence 
Measures: Mental acuity, information recall, analytical skill Important for: Wizard Racial Increases: 
High elf(+1) TieAing (+l) Gnome (+2) Human (+1) 

Wisdom 
Measures: Awareness, intuition, insight Important for: Cleric, druid Racial Increases: 
Hill dwarf(+1) Human (+1) Wood elf (+1) 

Charisma 
Measures: Confidence, eloquence, leadership Important for: Bard, sorcerer, warlock Racial Increases: 
Half-elf (+2) Dragonborn (+1) Drow (+1) Human (+1) Lightfoot halAing (+ 1) TieAing (+2) 

At 1st level, your character has I Hit Die, and the die type is determined by your class. You start with hit points equal to the highest roll of that die, as indicated in your class description. (You also add your Constitution modifier, which you'll determine in step 3.) This is also your hit point maximum. 
Record your character's hit points on your character sheet. Also record the type of Hit Die your character uses and the number ofHit Dice you have. After you rest, you can spend Hit Dice to regain hit points (see "Resting" in chapter 8). 
PROFICIENCY BONUS 
The table that appears in your class description shows your proficiency bonus, which is +2 for a 1st-level 
character. Your proficiency bonus applies to many of the 
numbersyou'll be recording on your character sheet: 
Attack rolls using weapons you're proficient with 
• Attack rolls with spells you cast 
• Ability checks using skills you're proficient in 
• 
Ability checks using tools you're proficient with 

• 
Saving throwsyou're proficient in 

• 
Saving throw DCs for spells you cast (explained in each spellcasting class) 


Your class determines your weapon proficiencies, your saving throw proficiencies, and some ofyour skill and tool proficiencies. (Skills are described in chapter 7, tools in chapter 5.) Your background gives you additional skill and tool proficiencies, and some races give you more proficiencies. Be sure to note all of these proficiencies, as well as your proficiency bonus, on your character sheet. 
Your proficiency bonus can't be added to a single die roll or other number more than once. Occasionally, your proficiency bonus might be modified (doubled or halved, for example) before you apply it. Ifa circumstance suggests that your proficiency bonus applies more than once to the same roll or that it should be multiplied more than once, you nevertheless add it only once, multiply it only once, and halve it only once. 
BUILDING BRUENOR, STEP 2 Bob imagines Bruenor charging into battle with an axe, one horn on his helmet broken off. He makes Brucnor a fighter and notes the fighter's proficiencies and 1st-level class features on his character sheet. 
As a I st-level fighter, Bruenor has 1 HitD ie-a dl0­and starts with hit points equal to 10 + his Constitution modifier. Bob notes this, and will record the final number after he determines Brucnor's Constitution score (see step 3). Bob also notes the proficiency bonus for a lst-level character, which is +2. 
3 . DETERMINE ABILITY SCORES 
Much of what your character does in the game depends on his or her six abilities: Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma. Each ability has a score, which is a numberyou record on your character sheet. 
The six abilities and their use in the game are described in chapter 7. The Ability Score Summary 
PART! !SHP IJY-STIPCIIAR\Cl'ERS 

table provides a quick reference for what qualities are measured by each ability, what races increases which abilities, and what classes consider each ability particularly important. 
You generate your character's six ability scores randomly. Roll four 6-sided dice and record the total of the highest three dice on a piece of scratch paper. Do this five more times, so that you have six numbers. If you want to save time or don't like the idea of randomly determining ability scores, you can use the following scores instead: 15, 14, 13, 12, 10, 8. 
Now take your six numbers and write each number beside one of your character's six abilities to assign scores lo Strength. Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma. Afterward, make any changes to your ability scores as a result of your race choice. 
After assigning your ability scores, determine your ability modifiers using the Ability Scores and Modifiers table. To determine an ability modifier without consulting the table, subtract 10 from the ability score and then divide the result by 2 (round down). Write the modifier next to each of your scores. 
BUILDING BRUENOR, STEP 3 Bob decides to use the standard set ofscores (15, 14, 13, 12, 10, 8) for Bruenor's abilities. Since he's a fighter, he puts his highest score, 15, in Strength. His next­highest, 14, goes in Constitution. Bruenor might be a brash fighter, but Bob decides he wants the dwarf to be older, wiser, and a good leader, so he puts decent scores in Wisdom and Charisma. After applying his racial benefits (increasing Bruenor's Constitution by 2 and his Strength by 2), Bruenor's ability scores and modifiers look like this: Strength 17 (+3), Dexterity 10 (+0), Constitution 16 (+3), Intelligence 8 (-1), Wisdom 13 
(+1), Charisma 12 (+1). Bob fills in Bruenor's final hit points: 10 + his Constitution modifier of +3. for a total of 13 hit points. 

VARIANT: CUSTOMIZING ABILITY SCORES At your Dungeon Master's option, you can use this variant for determining your ability scores. The method described here allows you to build a character with a set of ability scoresyou choose individually. 
You have 27 points to spend on your ability scores. The cost of each score is shown on the Ability Score Point Cost table. For example, a score of 14 costs 7 points. Using this method, 15 is the highest ability score you can end up with, before applying racial increases. You can't have a score lower than 8. 
This method of determining ability scores enables you to create a set of three high numbers and three low ones (15, 15, 15, 8, 8, 8), a set of numbers that are above 
ABILITY SCORE POINT COST 

Score  Cost  Score  Cost  
8  0  12  4  
9  l  13  5  
10  2  14  7  
11  3  15  9  

ABILITY SCORES AND MODIFIERS 
Score Modifier Score Modifier 
-5 16-17 +3 2-3 -4 18-19 +4 4-5 -3 20-21 +S 6-7 -2 22-23 +6 8-9 -1 24-25 +7 

10-11 +O 26-27 +8 12-13 +l 28-29 +9 14-15 +2 30 +10 
average and nearly equal (13, 13, 13, 12, 12, 12), or any set ofnumbers between those extremes. 

